# Cavern Dwellers

Ankheg Group, Large

Bite \(d8+1 damage\) 10 HP 3 Armor

Close, Reach

**Special Qualities:** Burrowing

A hide like plate armor and great crushing mandibles are problematic. A
stomach full of acid that can burn a hole through a stone wall makes them all
the worse. They’d be bad enough if they were proper insect-sized, but these
things have the gall to be as long as any given horse. It’s just not natural\!
Good thing they tend to stick to one place? Easy for you to say—you don’t have
an ankheg living under your corn field. _Instinct_: To undermine

  * Undermine the ground
  * Burst from the earth
  * Spray forth acid, eating away at metal and flesh

Cave Rat Horde, Small

Gnaw \(d6 damage 1 piercing\) 7 HP 1 Armor

Close, Messy

Who hasn’t seen a rat before? It’s like that, but nasty and big and not afraid
of you anymore. Maybe this one was a cousin to that one you caught in a trap
or the one you killed with a knife in that filthy tavern in Darrow. Maybe he’s
looking for a little ratty revenge. _Instinct_: To devour

  * Swarm
  * Rip something \(or someone\) apart

Choker Solitary, Stealthy, Intelligent

Choke \(d10 damage\) 15 HP 2 Armor

Close, Reach

**Special Qualities:** Flexible

Some say these things descended from the family of a cruel wizard who forced
them to live out their lives underground. They say his experiments led him to
fear the sun and ages passed while he descended into unlife, dragging his folk
along with him. These things resemble men, in a way. Head, four limbs and all
that. Only their skin is wet and rubbery and their arms long and fingers
grasping. They hate all life that bears the stink of the sun’s touch, as one
might expect. Jealousy, long-instilled, is hard to shake. _Instinct_: To deny
light

  * Hold someone, wringing the breath from them
  * Fling a held creature

Cloaker Solitary, Stealthy

Constrict \(d10 damage ignores armor\) 12 HP 1 Armor

Close

**Special Qualities:** Looks like a cloak

Don’t put on that cloak, Gareth. Don’t. You don’t know where it’s been. I tell
you, it’s no good. See\! It moved\! I’m not mad, Gareth, it moved\! Don’t do
it\! No\! GARETH\! _Instinct_: To engulf

  * Engulf the unsuspecting

Dwarven Warrior Horde, Organized

Axe \(d6 damage\) 7 HP 2 Armor

Close

For ages, men believed all dwarves were male and all were of this ilk: stoic
and proud warriors. Axe-wielding and plate-wearing. Stout bearded battle-
hungry dwarves who would push them, time and time again, back up out of their
mines and tunnels with ferocity. It just goes to show how little men know
about the elder races. These folk are merely a vanguard, and they bravely do
their duty to protect the riches of the Dwarven realm. Earn their trust and
you’ve an ally for life. Earn their ire and you’re not likely to regret it
very long. _Instinct_: To defend

  * Drive them back
  * Call up reinforcements

Earth Elemental Solitary, Huge

Smash \(d10+5 damage\) 27 HP 4 Armor

Reach, Forceful

**Special Qualities:** Made of stone

Our shaman says that all the things of the world have a spirit. Stones, trees,
a stream. Now that I’ve seen the earth roil under my feet and fists of stone
beat my friends half to death I’d like to believe that crazy old man. The one
I saw was huge—big as a house\! It came boiling up from a rockslide out of
nowhere and had a voice like an avalanche. I pay my respects, now. Rightly so.
_Instinct_: To show the strength of earth

  * Turn the ground into a weapon
  * Meld into stone

Fire Beetle Horde, Small

Flames \(d6 damage ignores armor\) 3 HP 3 Armor

Near

**Special Qualities:** Full of flames

_Scarabaeus pyractomena_\! What a delightful creature—see how its carapace
glitters in the light of our torches? Not too close now, they’re
temperamental, you see. The fire in their belly isn’t just metaphorical, no.
Watch as I goad the beast. Aha\! A spout of flame\! Unexpected, isn’t it? One
of these creatures alone, if it comes up from below, can be a hellish nuisance
to a farmstead or village. A whole swarm? There’s a reason they call it a
conflagration of fire beetles. _Instinct_: To enflame

  * Undermine the ground
  * Burst from the earth
  * Spray forth flames

Gargoyle Horde, Stealthy, Hoarder

Claw \(d6 damage\) 3 HP 2 Armor

Close

**Special Qualities:** Wings

It’s a sad thing, really. Guardians bred by magi of the past with no more
castles to guard. Their ancestors’ sacred task bred into their blood leads
them to find a place—ruins mostly, but sometimes a cave or hill or mountain
cliff—and guard it as though their masters yet lived below. They’re
notoriously good at finding valuables buried below the earth, though. Find one
of these winged reptiles and you’ll find yourself a treasure nearby. Just be
careful, they’re hard to spot and tend to move in packs. _Instinct_: To guard

  * Attack with the element of surprise
  * Take to the air
  * Blend into stonework

Gelatinous Cube Solitary, Large, Stealthy, Amorphous

Engulf \(d10+1 damage ignores armor\) 20 HP 1 Armor

Hand

**Special Qualities:** Transparent

How many adventurers’ last thoughts were “strange, this tunnel seems cleaner
than most?” Too many, and all because of this transparent menace. A great
acidic blob that expands to fill a small chamber or corridor and then slides,
ever so slowly along, eating everything in its path. It cannot eat stone or
metal and will often have them floating in its jelly mass. Blech. _Instinct_:
To clean

  * Fill an apparently empty space
  * Dissolve

Goblin Horde, Small, Intelligent, Organized

Spear \(d6 damage\) 3 HP 1 Armor

Close, Reach

Nobody seems to know where these things came from. Elves say they’re the
dwarves’ fault—dredged up from a hidden place beneath the earth. Dwarves say
they’re bad elvish children, taken away at birth and raised in the dark. The
truth of the matter is that goblins have always been here and they’ll be here
once all the civilized races have fallen and gone away. Goblins never die out.
There’s just too damn many of them. _Instinct_: To multiply

  * Charge\!
  * Call more goblins
  * Retreat and return with \(many\) more

Goblin Orkaster Solitary, Small, Magical, Intelligent, Organized

Acid orb \(d10+1 damage ignores armor\) 12 HP 0 Armor

Near, Far

Oh lord, who taught them magic? _Instinct_: To tap power beyond their stature

  * Unleash a poorly understood spell
  * Pour forth magical chaos
  * Use other goblins for shields

Goliath Group, Huge, Organized, Intelligent

Mace \(d8+7 damage\) 14 HP 1 Armor

Reach, Forceful

They dwell beneath the earth because they do not belong above it any longer.
An undying race of mighty titans fled the plains and mountains in ages
past—driven out by men and their heroes. Left to bide their time in the dark,
hate and anger warmed by the pools of lava deep below. It’s said that an
earthquake is a goliath’s birthing cry. Someday they’ll take back what’s
theirs. _Instinct_: To retake

  * Shake the earth
  * Retreat, only to come back stronger

Otyugh Solitary, Large

Tentacles \(d10+3 damage\) 20 HP 1 Armor

Close, Reach, Forceful

**Special Qualities:** Filth Fever

The mating call of the otyugh is a horrible, blaring cry that sounds like a
cross between an elephant dying and an over-eager vulture. The otyugh spends
much of its time partly submerged in filthy water and prefers eating garbage
over any other food. As a result, it often grows fat and strong on the offal
of orcs, goblins and other cave-dwelling sub-humans. Get too close, however,
and you’ll have one of its barbed tentacles dragging you into that soggy,
razor-toothed maw. If you get away with your life, best get to a doctor, or
your victory may be short lived. _Instinct_: To befoul

  * Infect someone with filth fever
  * Fling someone or something

Maggot-Squid Horde, Small

Chew \(d6 damage\) 3 HP 1 Armor

Close

**Special Qualities:** Amphibious, Paralyzing Tentacles

The gods that made this thing were playing some sick joke on the civilized
folk of the world. The maggot-squid wields a face full of horrible squirming
tentacles that, if they touch you, feel like being struck by lightning.
They’ll paralyze you and chew you up slowly while you’re helpless. Best to not
let it get to that. _Instinct_: To eat

  * Paralyze with a touch

Purple Worm Solitary, Huge

Bite \(d10+5 damage\) 20 HP 2 Armor

Reach, Forceful

**Special Qualities:** Burrowing

Iä\! Iä\! The Purple Worm\! Blessed is its holy slime\! We walk, unworthy, in
its miles of massive tunnels. We are but shadows under its violet and all-
consuming glory. Mere acolytes, we who hope someday to return to the great
embrace of its tooth-ringed maw. Let it consume us\! Let it eat our homes and
villages so that we might be taken\! Iä\! Iä\! The Purple Worm\! _Instinct_:
To consume

  * Swallow whole
  * Tunnel through stone and earth

Roper Solitary, Large, Stealthy, Intelligent

Bite \(d10+1 damage\) 16 HP 1 Armor

Close, Reach

**Special Qualities:** Rock-like Flesh

Evolutionary happenstance has created a clever underground predator. Disguised
as a rocky formation—most often a stalactite or stalagmite—the roper waits for
its prey to wander by. When it does, whether it’s a rat, a goblin or a
foolhardy adventurer, a mass of thin, whipping tentacles erupts from the
thing’s hide. A hundred lashes in the blink of an eye and the stunned prey is
being dragged into the roper’s mouth. Surprisingly effective for a thing that
looks like a rock. _Instinct_: To ambush

  * Ensnare the unsuspecting
  * Disarm a foe
  * Chew on someone

Rot Grub Horde, Tiny

Burrow \(d6-2 damage\) 3 HP 0 Armor

Hand

**Special Qualities:** Burrow into flesh

They live in your skin. Or your organ meat. Or your eyeballs. They grow there
and then, in a bloody and horrific display, burrow their way out. Disgusting.
_Instinct_: To infect

  * Burrow under flesh
  * Lay eggs
  * Burst forth from an infected creature

Spiderlord Solitary, Large, Devious, Intelligent

Mandibles \(d8+4 damage\) 16 HP 3 Armor

Close, Reach

**Special Qualities:** Burrowing

Even spiders have their gods, whispered to in webs with little praying arms.
_Instinct_: To weave webs \(literal and metaphorical\)

  * Enmesh in webbing
  * Put a plot into motion

Troglodyte Group, Organized

Club \(d8 damage\) 10 HP 1 Armor

Close

Long-forgotten, our last remaining ancestors dwell in caves in the wild parts
of the world. Driven away by our cities and villages, our iron swords and our
fire, these ape-men eat their meat raw with sharp-nailed hands and jagged
teeth. They strike out at frontier villages wielding clubs and in overwhelming
numbers to seize cattle, tools, and poor prisoners to drag into the hills.
Known for their viciousness and their stink, they’re an old and dying race
we’d all sooner forget existed. _Instinct_: To prey on civilization

  * Raid and retreat
  * Use scavenged weapons or magic

